README.md, before:

lh2015-qg
=========

This repository, currently under development, contains shared software
for the quark-gluon studies done in the context of the [Physics at TeV
colliders workshop](http://phystev.cnrs.fr/) in June 2015.

A wiki page with our progress is here:

http://phystev.cnrs.fr/wiki/2015:groups:sm:qg

This github repository is hosted here:

https://github.com/gsoyez/lh2015-qg


Brief description and Guidelines for the ee study
=================================================

Contents
 - Description (includes naming conventions for MC users -- please read)
 - Status of the different MC runs
 - what plots we do
 - description of the Rivet routine
 - Workflow (includes setting the rivet environment variables needed for many things)

Description
-----------

- There is a Rivet routine that computes a bunch of observables at a
  few R values (see "Description of the Rivet Routine" below for
  details)

- Consider 2 processes:
   . mu+ mu- -> Z/gamma* -> u ubar
   . mu+ mu- -> Higgs    -> g g

- Each Monte Carlo lives in a folder
    &lt;Generator>-&lt;Version>
  e.g. Pythia-8.1.85 or Herwig-2.7.1

- Each Monte Carlo should produce several result files (YODA):
   . their best central prediction
   . variations of alphas from whatever the "best prediction" has by
     factors of 0.8 and 1.2 [two extra values to be added afterwards]
   . a version without g->qqbar splitting
   . any other variations they think might help understanding what is
     going on
   . By default, run at hadron level

- In each Monte-Carlo folder, there should be a README that tells how
  the results can be generated. This potentially goes with additional
  card files (in a "cards" subfolder if possible).
  E.g. the Sherpa-2.1.1/README file should contain something like
  &lt;this_file.yoda> is obtained by running
     Sherpa NJET:2 ANALYSIS=Rivet -A results/this_file -f cards/Run-hgg.dat

- Consider 5 energies: Q=50, 100, 200, 400, 800 GeV. Variations for
  each Monte-Carlo should only be done at 200 GeV. For the other
  energies, only produce the "best" prediction.

- Naming conventions for the results should follow the following scheme
    < Generator >-< Version >/< level >/< process >-< Q >[flags].yoda

  where
   - level is either hadron or parton
   - process is either uu or gg
   - the "best" prediction has no flags
   - the alphas variations have flags -alphasx08 -alphasx12
   - the switching off of g->qqbar has flags -nogqq
   - any additional variations comes with a friendly flag (e.g. -nome
     for Matrix-element switched off or -njet0, ...). These should be
     briefly described in the README



Status of the MC simulations
----------------------------

Status of the results:
<pre>
  |-----------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
  |                 |                hadron                |                parton                |
  |-----------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
  |                 |   Q dep    | alphas dep |  no g->qq  |   Q dep    | alphas dep |  no g->qq  |  
  |-----------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
  ! Herwig-2_7_1    |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |
  | Herwig-7-dipole |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  | Pythia-8205     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  | Sherpa-2.1.1    |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |   MISSING  |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  | Vincia-1201     |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  |-----------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
</pre>
Notes:
 - Herwig runs are missing the alphasx12 results. Not an issue.

Status of the other files
<pre>
  |-----------------|------------|--------------------------------|
  |                 |   README   |         code/cards             |
  |-----------------|------------|--------------------------------|
  ! Herwig-2_7_1    |    ok      | cards, no code needed          |
  | Herwig-7-dipole |  MISSING   | MISSING                        |
  | Pythia-8205     |    ok      | cards ok, CODE MISSING         |
  | Sherpa-2.1.1    |  MISSING   | template cards, no code needed |
  | Vincia-1201     |    ok      | cards ok, CODE MISSING         |
  |-----------------|------------|--------------------------------|
</pre>
Description of what information/plots are extracted of the result files
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Baseline: Q = 200 GeV, R = 0.6, all Monte Carlo programs optimal

produce a full set of distribution plots for
 . Quark distribution, gluon distribution, separation, integrated separation
 . Pythia variations: noME, nogqq, ...
 . Herwig variations: ...
 . Sherpa variations: ...
 . Vincia variations: noME, ...

Produce some variation plots (one plot for each observable and quality measure)
 . Q = 50, 100, 200, 400, 800 GeV (everything else baseline)
 . R = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0 (everything else baseline)
 . delta alphas / alphas = -0.2, -0.1, 0.0, +0.1, +0.2 (everything else baseline)



Description of the Rivet Routine
--------------------------------
- Extract all jets (ee-anti-kt(R)) above a given Emin
  JetDefinition jet_def(ee_genkt_algorithm, R, -1.0, WTA_modp_scheme)
  Emin is taken as 0.4*Q

- Core list of shapes to study
    . Generalised angularities:
        kappa=1.0, beta=2.0
        kappa=1.0, beta=1.0
        kappa=1.0, beta=0.5
        kappa=0.0, beta=0.0
        kappa=2.0, beta=0.0
        [use lin and log binning]
    . Thrust for the whole event (thrust axis, lin ang log binning)
    . total multiplicity in 4 different thrust bins:
        T < (5 GeV)/Q
        (5 GeV)/Q < T < 0.1
        0.1 < T < 0.2
        0.2 < T

- Study R=0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0


Processes to consider:

Energies [GeV]: (Q=sqrts)
 - 1st batch: 50, 200, 800
 - 2nd batch: 100, 400, 1600, 3200


Workflow     
--------

This describes how to run the Rivet analysis and produce some
plots. For instructions on how to run the different event generators,
see details in the respective generator directories.

If you only want to process yoda files, you can skip steps 2 and 4.

1. make sure you have the proper variables set to run rivet
     source ${rivet_path}/rivetenv.(c)sh

2. build the analysis using
     rivet-buildplugin RivetMC_LHQG.so MC_LHQG_dijet.cc MC_LHQG_Zjet.cc MC_LHQG_EE.cc

3. set the current directory in the Rivet analyses path by including . in 
   the RIVET_ANALYSIS_PATH environment variable

4. Run Rivet [producing the yoda files]:
     mkfifo fifo.hepmc
     run_your_generator_output into fifo.hepmc &
     rivet --analysis=MC_LHQG_EE fifo.hepmc -H your_preferred_output.yoda
   For q/g enrichment, run it once for quarks and once for gluons.

5. Produce the separation information and plots by runnung
     ./post-process.sh

   This does a few things:
     - it creates the separation tables and yoda histograms for all the results
     - it rebins the histograms for nicer plots
     - it produces the quark, gluon and separation MC comparison plots
       (parton and hadron level)
     - it generate summary histograms ans plot them
   Check plots.log for details of the run and enjoy the plots in plots/...

Note that individual results can be obtained by individual tools (see
the file description above) and the rivet-mkhtml tool.

     rivet-mkhtml <list of yoda files to plot> -o directory [-c config file]


Results available --- OUTDATED
-----------------

As of 2015-06-05, 

- Herwig: yoda files provided by Andrzej

- Pythia: card files to run hadron level with a custom tune (with and without ME corrections)
  code to run them awaiting commit
  Yoda files provided by Deepak [some renaming will probably be needed at some point]

- Vincia: card files to run hadron level with a custom tune
  code to run them awaiting commit
  Yoda files provided by Deepak [some renaming will probably be needed at some point]


Plots wanted --- OUTDATED
------------

the post-process.sh script does the following
   (i) generate the separations
  (ii) do a bit of rebinning for aesthetic reasons
 (iii) produce a bunch of plots

Note that by default existing files are not overwritten. Use FORCE=yes
post-process.sh to overwrite everything.

Description of the pp analysis
==============================

The pp analyses are implemented as Rivet routines in two files: 

- MC_LHQG_Zjet.cc which studies Z+jet events.

  The event reconstruction goes as follows. First, a Z boson decaying
  to muons with a mass between 66 and 116 GeV and a pT of at least 100
  GeV is recontructed ("bare" Z finder). Then, we require a jet with a
  pT of at least 60% of the Z pT (if more than one, we keep the
  hardest one only). We study the observables listed below.


- MC_LHQG_dijet.cc which studies dijet events. 

  The event reconstruction goes as follows. We select the 2 hardest
  jest in the event. We require that their pT sum is at least 200 GeV
  and that the pT of the second hardest jet is at least 60% of the pT
  of the leading jet. Both jets are then kept for study.

Studies: The jet selection described above is repeated for R=0.2, 0.4,
0.6, 0.8 and 1.0. The WTA recombination scheme is used For each of the
selected jets, we compute the same angularities as for the ee study,
this time defined in terms of pT and rapidity-phi distances.

We also add a study of the same quantities computed on the jet groomed
with teh modified MassDrop tagger (with zcut=0.1).


Open questions: 

 - is that setup OK with everyone?

 - what rapidity acceptance do we use? [At the moment, I use +-4 but I
   would rather suggest +-2.5 if everyone agrees]

 - I would tend to apply the extra requirement that the rapidity
   difference between the 2 jets (or between the jet and the Z boson)
   is at most 1. This selects cleaner events. Is that fine with
   everyone?

 - I would tend to use the E-scheme to select the jet (since that is
   what people use in practice) and recluster the jet constituents
   with the WTA scheme to define the angularity axis. Anyone against
   that option? We could event recluster the jet with the
   Cambridge/Aachen algorithm which is already used for the mMDT.

File contents
=============

- Shapes.{hh,cc}: contains (FastJet-style) implementation of useful
  jet shapes (only GeneralisedAngularity so far)

- MC_LHQG_EE.cc  Rivet Analysis for the e+e- studies

- MC_LHQG_Zjet.cc    Rivet Analysis for the pp studies
  MC_LHQG_dijet.cc

- MC_LHQG.cc     Rivet Analysis for the pp studies [OUT OF DATE and "bugged"]


- Pythia/Vincia/Herwig/Sherpa directories contain codes and/or yoda files for
  the different generators

- some helper scripts
   . post-process.sh   an overall script that creates the separation tables and the plots
                       This is the script you run to get results out of a git checkout
                       The other files below are secondary.

   . compute-efficiencies.py <quark>.yoda <gluon>.yoda <efficiency>.yoda
      will, given the quark and gluon output, produce
      <efficiency>.yoda with the efficiency histograms and output to
      stdout a table with a bunch of quality measures (see notes in
      tex/ for details) . compute_efficiencies.py

   . get-separation.sh separation_table observable measure
      simple helper that extracts one number (corresponding to a given
      observable and separation measure) from a separation table
      (output of compute-efficiencies.py)

   . produce-separation-plots.py
      creates a yoda file with summary information for a given separation table

Batch run
=========

The workdir directory contains a script to run with different configuration. The
script is called multirun. It requires for each code, including rivet, a bash
file containing the shell environment required to run the code. The files must
be placed in the lh2015-qg directory checked out from git and must be named:
setup-rivet, setup-pythia, setup-vincia, setup-sherpa. For Pythia and Vincia,
the PATH must include the respective examples directories and the example
executables main42 and vinci01 must be compiled.

When multirun is executed without any option it creates a directory for each
configuration containing a datacard and a script, job.sh, to run the
analysis. When the --submit option is used in addition to the directory
creation jobs are sent on the LSF batch system. For batch submission the runloop
script must be run on lxplus from the AFS area.

The datacards are produced from the .template files located in
lh2015-qg/Sherpa-2.1.1, lh2015-qg/Vincia, lh2015-qg/Pythia. The tags %xxx%
contained in the templates are replaced by selected value by the multirun
script. The part at the end of this script can be edited to choice different run
configurations.

Note: the multirun script uses fifo for every generator and the analysis section
of the Sherpa configuration file is therefore ignored.

Contributors
============

Gregory Soyez
Jesse Thaler
Andrzej Siodmok
Philippe Gras
Deepak Kar
...

Commit message:

added some info abbout linking against fastjet-contrib

README.md, after:

lh2015-qg
=========

This repository, currently under development, contains shared software
for the quark-gluon studies done in the context of the [Physics at TeV
colliders workshop](http://phystev.cnrs.fr/) in June 2015.

A wiki page with our progress is here:

http://phystev.cnrs.fr/wiki/2015:groups:sm:qg

This github repository is hosted here:

https://github.com/gsoyez/lh2015-qg


Brief description and Guidelines for the ee study
=================================================

Contents
 - Description (includes naming conventions for MC users -- please read)
 - Status of the different MC runs
 - what plots we do
 - description of the Rivet routine
 - Workflow (includes setting the rivet environment variables needed for many things)

Description
-----------

- There is a Rivet routine that computes a bunch of observables at a
  few R values (see "Description of the Rivet Routine" below for
  details)

- Consider 2 processes:
   . mu+ mu- -> Z/gamma* -> u ubar
   . mu+ mu- -> Higgs    -> g g

- Each Monte Carlo lives in a folder
    &lt;Generator>-&lt;Version>
  e.g. Pythia-8.1.85 or Herwig-2.7.1

- Each Monte Carlo should produce several result files (YODA):
   . their best central prediction
   . variations of alphas from whatever the "best prediction" has by
     factors of 0.8 and 1.2 [two extra values to be added afterwards]
   . a version without g->qqbar splitting
   . any other variations they think might help understanding what is
     going on
   . By default, run at hadron level

- In each Monte-Carlo folder, there should be a README that tells how
  the results can be generated. This potentially goes with additional
  card files (in a "cards" subfolder if possible).
  E.g. the Sherpa-2.1.1/README file should contain something like
  &lt;this_file.yoda> is obtained by running
     Sherpa NJET:2 ANALYSIS=Rivet -A results/this_file -f cards/Run-hgg.dat

- Consider 5 energies: Q=50, 100, 200, 400, 800 GeV. Variations for
  each Monte-Carlo should only be done at 200 GeV. For the other
  energies, only produce the "best" prediction.

- Naming conventions for the results should follow the following scheme
    < Generator >-< Version >/< level >/< process >-< Q >[flags].yoda

  where
   - level is either hadron or parton
   - process is either uu or gg
   - the "best" prediction has no flags
   - the alphas variations have flags -alphasx08 -alphasx12
   - the switching off of g->qqbar has flags -nogqq
   - any additional variations comes with a friendly flag (e.g. -nome
     for Matrix-element switched off or -njet0, ...). These should be
     briefly described in the README



Status of the MC simulations
----------------------------

Status of the results:
<pre>
  |-----------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
  |                 |                hadron                |                parton                |
  |-----------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
  |                 |   Q dep    | alphas dep |  no g->qq  |   Q dep    | alphas dep |  no g->qq  |  
  |-----------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
  ! Herwig-2_7_1    |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |
  | Herwig-7-dipole |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  | Pythia-8205     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  | Sherpa-2.1.1    |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |   MISSING  |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  | Vincia-1201     |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |     ok     |     ok     |   MISSING  |
  |-----------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
</pre>
Notes:
 - Herwig runs are missing the alphasx12 results. Not an issue.

Status of the other files
<pre>
  |-----------------|------------|--------------------------------|
  |                 |   README   |         code/cards             |
  |-----------------|------------|--------------------------------|
  ! Herwig-2_7_1    |    ok      | cards, no code needed          |
  | Herwig-7-dipole |  MISSING   | MISSING                        |
  | Pythia-8205     |    ok      | cards ok, CODE MISSING         |
  | Sherpa-2.1.1    |  MISSING   | template cards, no code needed |
  | Vincia-1201     |    ok      | cards ok, CODE MISSING         |
  |-----------------|------------|--------------------------------|
</pre>
Description of what information/plots are extracted of the result files
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Baseline: Q = 200 GeV, R = 0.6, all Monte Carlo programs optimal

produce a full set of distribution plots for
 . Quark distribution, gluon distribution, separation, integrated separation
 . Pythia variations: noME, nogqq, ...
 . Herwig variations: ...
 . Sherpa variations: ...
 . Vincia variations: noME, ...

Produce some variation plots (one plot for each observable and quality measure)
 . Q = 50, 100, 200, 400, 800 GeV (everything else baseline)
 . R = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0 (everything else baseline)
 . delta alphas / alphas = -0.2, -0.1, 0.0, +0.1, +0.2 (everything else baseline)



Description of the Rivet Routine
--------------------------------
- Extract all jets (ee-anti-kt(R)) above a given Emin
  JetDefinition jet_def(ee_genkt_algorithm, R, -1.0, WTA_modp_scheme)
  Emin is taken as 0.4*Q

- Core list of shapes to study
    . Generalised angularities:
        kappa=1.0, beta=2.0
        kappa=1.0, beta=1.0
        kappa=1.0, beta=0.5
        kappa=0.0, beta=0.0
        kappa=2.0, beta=0.0
        [use lin and log binning]
    . Thrust for the whole event (thrust axis, lin ang log binning)
    . total multiplicity in 4 different thrust bins:
        T < (5 GeV)/Q
        (5 GeV)/Q < T < 0.1
        0.1 < T < 0.2
        0.2 < T

- Study R=0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0


Processes to consider:

Energies [GeV]: (Q=sqrts)
 - 1st batch: 50, 200, 800
 - 2nd batch: 100, 400, 1600, 3200


Workflow     
--------

This describes how to run the Rivet analysis and produce some
plots. For instructions on how to run the different event generators,
see details in the respective generator directories.

If you only want to process yoda files, you can skip steps 2 and 4.

1. make sure you have the proper variables set to run rivet
     source ${rivet_path}/rivetenv.(c)sh

2. build the analysis using
     rivet-buildplugin RivetMC_LHQG.so MC_LHQG_dijet.cc MC_LHQG_Zjet.cc MC_LHQG_EE.cc \
       -L<path_to_fastjet> -lfastjetcontribfragile
   (See note below)

3. set the current directory in the Rivet analyses path by including . in 
   the RIVET_ANALYSIS_PATH environment variable

4. Run Rivet [producing the yoda files]:
     mkfifo fifo.hepmc
     run_your_generator_output into fifo.hepmc &
     rivet --analysis=MC_LHQG_EE fifo.hepmc -H your_preferred_output.yoda
   For q/g enrichment, run it once for quarks and once for gluons.

5. Produce the separation information and plots by runnung
     ./post-process.sh

   This does a few things:
     - it creates the separation tables and yoda histograms for all the results
     - it rebins the histograms for nicer plots
     - it produces the quark, gluon and separation MC comparison plots
       (parton and hadron level)
     - it generate summary histograms ans plot them
   Check plots.log for details of the run and enjoy the plots in plots/...

Note that individual results can be obtained by individual tools (see
the file description above) and the rivet-mkhtml tool.

     rivet-mkhtml <list of yoda files to plot> -o directory [-c config file]


Compilation Note:

  The proton-proton analyses both use the modifiedMassDropTagger from
  fastjet-contrib. One therefore need to instsall fastjet-contrib and
  link against it.

  Since Rivet builds shared libraries, it is advised to also install
  fastjet-contrib as a shared library which is done by running
  
    make fragile-shared-install

  after the regular installation in the fastjet-contrib directory.
  An alternative is to build the static libraries with the
  "-DPIC -fPIC" compilation flags.

  If you just incluide the EE analysis in the Rivet plugin, linking
  against fastjet-contrib is not required.

Results available --- OUTDATED
-----------------

As of 2015-06-05, 

- Herwig: yoda files provided by Andrzej

- Pythia: card files to run hadron level with a custom tune (with and without ME corrections)
  code to run them awaiting commit
  Yoda files provided by Deepak [some renaming will probably be needed at some point]

- Vincia: card files to run hadron level with a custom tune
  code to run them awaiting commit
  Yoda files provided by Deepak [some renaming will probably be needed at some point]


Plots wanted --- OUTDATED
------------

the post-process.sh script does the following
   (i) generate the separations
  (ii) do a bit of rebinning for aesthetic reasons
 (iii) produce a bunch of plots

Note that by default existing files are not overwritten. Use FORCE=yes
post-process.sh to overwrite everything.

Description of the pp analysis
==============================

The pp analyses are implemented as Rivet routines in two files: 

- MC_LHQG_Zjet.cc which studies Z+jet events.

  The event reconstruction goes as follows. First, a Z boson decaying
  to muons with a mass between 66 and 116 GeV and a pT of at least 100
  GeV is recontructed ("bare" Z finder). Then, we require a jet with a
  pT of at least 60% of the Z pT (if more than one, we keep the
  hardest one only). We study the observables listed below.


- MC_LHQG_dijet.cc which studies dijet events. 

  The event reconstruction goes as follows. We select the 2 hardest
  jest in the event. We require that their pT sum is at least 200 GeV
  and that the pT of the second hardest jet is at least 60% of the pT
  of the leading jet. Both jets are then kept for study.

Studies: The jet selection described above is repeated for R=0.2, 0.4,
0.6, 0.8 and 1.0. The WTA recombination scheme is used For each of the
selected jets, we compute the same angularities as for the ee study,
this time defined in terms of pT and rapidity-phi distances.

We also add a study of the same quantities computed on the jet groomed
with the modified MassDrop tagger (with zcut=0.1).

File contents
=============

- Shapes.{hh,cc}: contains (FastJet-style) implementation of useful
  jet shapes (only GeneralisedAngularity so far)

- MC_LHQG_EE.cc  Rivet Analysis for the e+e- studies

- MC_LHQG_Zjet.cc    Rivet Analysis for the pp studies
  MC_LHQG_dijet.cc

- MC_LHQG.cc     Rivet Analysis for the pp studies [OUT OF DATE and "bugged"]


- Pythia/Vincia/Herwig/Sherpa directories contain codes and/or yoda files for
  the different generators

- some helper scripts
   . post-process.sh   an overall script that creates the separation tables and the plots
                       This is the script you run to get results out of a git checkout
                       The other files below are secondary.

   . compute-efficiencies.py <quark>.yoda <gluon>.yoda <efficiency>.yoda
      will, given the quark and gluon output, produce
      <efficiency>.yoda with the efficiency histograms and output to
      stdout a table with a bunch of quality measures (see notes in
      tex/ for details) . compute_efficiencies.py

   . get-separation.sh separation_table observable measure
      simple helper that extracts one number (corresponding to a given
      observable and separation measure) from a separation table
      (output of compute-efficiencies.py)

   . produce-separation-plots.py
      creates a yoda file with summary information for a given separation table

Batch run
=========

The workdir directory contains a script to run with different configuration. The
script is called multirun. It requires for each code, including rivet, a bash
file containing the shell environment required to run the code. The files must
be placed in the lh2015-qg directory checked out from git and must be named:
setup-rivet, setup-pythia, setup-vincia, setup-sherpa. For Pythia and Vincia,
the PATH must include the respective examples directories and the example
executables main42 and vinci01 must be compiled.

When multirun is executed without any option it creates a directory for each
configuration containing a datacard and a script, job.sh, to run the
analysis. When the --submit option is used in addition to the directory
creation jobs are sent on the LSF batch system. For batch submission the runloop
script must be run on lxplus from the AFS area.

The datacards are produced from the .template files located in
lh2015-qg/Sherpa-2.1.1, lh2015-qg/Vincia, lh2015-qg/Pythia. The tags %xxx%
contained in the templates are replaced by selected value by the multirun
script. The part at the end of this script can be edited to choice different run
configurations.

Note: the multirun script uses fifo for every generator and the analysis section
of the Sherpa configuration file is therefore ignored.

Contributors
============

Gregory Soyez
Jesse Thaler
Andrzej Siodmok
Philippe Gras
Deepak Kar
...
